From: ftp://ftp.taygeta.com/pub/Forth/Applications/ANS
Retrieved: 30th/11/2017

STANDARD FORTH

LZ77 Data Compression
WIL BADEN
Costa Mesa, California
wilbaden@netcom.com

Programmers are lousy lovers.  They always try to get the job done 
faster than before.  And when they do, they brag that they have 
better performance.  Programmers are the only men who boast how 
small theirs is.

Since 1984 there has been amazing progress in data compression. 
Not so long ago I got SALIENT SOFTWAREÕs AutoDoubler for the 
Macintosh. My 80 megabyte hard drive had 2 meg available when I 
installed the program. Since it was a Tuesday, I went out for lasagna, 
and when I got back an hour later I had 19 meg available.

My 80 meg hard drive soon held 108 megs worth of data with 
room for 25 to 50 more megabytes.

Not only that, but many programs loaded faster and read data 
faster. When a file takes only half as much disk space, the data can 
be read twice as fast.

How they do it is a trade secret, and Salient has applied for a 
patent on their technology. There are also many variations possible 
concerning details.

However, I have a good idea about where to begin looking.

Modern methods of data compression all go back to J. ZIV and A. 
LEMPEL. In 1977 they published a paper in an engineering journal on 
a new approach to data compresson.

J. ZIV and A. LEMPEL, ÒA Universal Algorithm for Sequential Data
Compression,Ó IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 23:3, 337-343.

In 1978 they published a paper about a related and more 
elaborate method. In 1984 Unisys employee TERRY WELCH described 
and had patented a version of the 1978 method suitable for 
programming. This is called LZW for Lempel, Ziv, and Welch.

LZW is the basis of ARC and PKARC on the PC, compress in Unix, and 
the original StuffIt on the Mac.

Around 1988 after losing a law suit PHIL KATZ (PKARC) came out 
with a better program, PKZIP. This is derived from the 1977 Ziv-
Lempel paper. It turns out that the simpler method has better 
performance and is smaller. With additional processing, phenomonal 
results have been obtained. 
 All popular archivers Ñ arj, lha, zip, zoo, stac, auto-doubler, 
current stuffit Ñ are variations on the LZ77 theme.

The idea of LZ77 is very simple. It is explained in the FAQ 
(frequently asked question) list for compression technology:

<The LZ77 family of compressors>

  LZ77-based schemes keep track of the last n bytes of data seen, and when a 
phrase is encountered that has already been seen, they output a pair of 
values corresponding to the position of the phrase in the previously-seen 
buffer of data, and the length of the phrase.  In effect the compressor moves 
a fixed-size ÒwindowÓ over the data (generally referred to as a Òsliding 
windowÓ [or Òring bufferÓ], with the position part of the (position, length) pair 
referring to the position of the phrase within the window.  The most commonly
used algorithms are derived from the LZSS scheme described by JAMES STORER and 
THOMAS SZYMANSKI in 1982.  In this the compressor maintains a window of size 
N bytes and a Òlookahead bufferÓ the contents of which it tries to find a 
match for in the window:

  while( lookAheadBuffer not empty )
      {
      get pointer ( position, match ) to the longest match in the window
          for the lookahead buffer;

      if( length > MINIMUM_MATCH_LENGTH )
          {
          output a ( position, length ) pair;
          shift the window length characters along;
          }
      else
          {
          output the first character in the lookahead buffer;
          shift the window 1 character along;
          }
      }
       
  Decompression is simple and fast:  Whenever a ( position, length ) pair is 
encountered, go to that ( position ) in the window and copy ( length ) bytes 
to the output.

  Sliding-window-based schemes can be simplified by numbering the input text
characters mod N, in effect creating a circular buffer.  The sliding window
approach automatically creates the LRU effect which must be done explicitly in
LZ78 schemes.  Variants of this method apply additional compression to the
output of the LZSS compressor, which include a simple variable-length code
(LZB), dynamic Huffman coding (LZH), and Shannon-Fano coding (ZIP 1.x)), all
of which result in a certain degree of improvement over the basic scheme,
especially when the data are rather random and the LZSS compressor has little
effect.

 A copy of this FAQ is available by ftp from rtfm.mit.edu in 
/pub/usenet/news.answers as compression-faq/part[1-3].

The profane pseudocode given above for LZ77 compression can be 
Forthed as:

	BEGIN
		look-ahead-buffer-used 0= not
	WHILE
		get-pointer(position,match)-to-the-longest-match-in-window
		length minimum-match-length > IF
			output-a-(position,match)-pair
			shift-the-window-length-characters-along
		ELSE
			output-the-first-character-in-the-lookahead-buffer
			shift-the-window-1-character-along
		THEN
	REPEAT

 The bottleneck is the finding the longest match quickly. A na•ve 
brute force method is hardly acceptable. ÒItÕs hardly acceptableÓ is a 
gentilism for Òit sucksÓ. Hashing, or binary search trees, or a 
combination, is recommended.

- Waterworth patented (4,701,745) the algorithm now known as LZRW1,
  because Ross Williams reinvented it later and posted it on
  comp.compression on April 22, 1991. The *same* algorithm has later
  been patented by Gibson & Graybill. The patent office failed
  to recognize that the same algorithm was patented twice, even though
  the wording used in the two patents is very similar.

  The Waterworth patent is now owned by Stac Inc, which won a lawsuit
  against Microsoft, concerning the compression feature of MSDOS 6.0.

  Damages awarded were $120 million.

- Fiala and Greene obtained in 1990 a patent (4,906,991) on all
  implementations of LZ77 using a tree data structure.

- Notenboom (from Microsoft) 4,955,066 uses three levels of
  compression, starting with run length encoding.

- The Gibson & Graybill patent 5,049,881 covers the LZRW1 algorithm
  previously patented by Waterworth and reinvented by Ross Williams.

  Claims 4 and 12 are very general and could be interpreted as
  applying to any LZ algorithm using hashing (including all variants
  of LZ78):

- Phil Katz, author of pkzip, also has a patent on LZ77 (5,051,745)
  but the claims only apply to sorted hash tables, and when the hash
  table is substantially smaller than the window size.

- IBM patented (5,001,478) the idea of combining a history buffer (the
  LZ77 technique) and a lexicon (as in LZ78).

- Stac Inc patented (5,016,009 and 5,126,739) yet another variation of LZ77
  with hashing. The '009 patent was used in the lawsuit against Microsoft
  (see above). Stac also has patents on LZ77 with parallel lookup in
  hardware (4,841,092 and 5,003,307).

- Chambers 5,155,484 is yet another variation of LZ77 with hashing. The
  hash function is just the juxtaposition of two input bytes.   This is the
  'invention' being patented.  The hash table is named 'direct lookup
  table'.  [Chambers is the author of AutoDoubler and DiskDoubler.]

A simple implementation of LZSS using binary search trees giving 
very good but not best performance was put into the public domain 
in 1988 by HARUHIKO OKUMURA. This implementation has inspired the 
high performance programs now in use.

Given here is a Standard Forth version of that program. It shows 
its genealogy by the unusually long Forth definitions. I believe that 
politically correct factoring would not help understanding and would 
degrade performance. This program is 8 to 10 times faster than the 
brute force implementation I gave at the 1992 FORML Conference. It 
can serve as material for studying data compression in Forth, as the 
original program did in C and Pascal.

As an example, here is the beginning of Green Eggs and Ham, 
copyright 1960, DR. SEUSS.

That Sam-I-am!  That Sam-I-am!  I do not like that Sam-I-am!
Do you like green eggs and ham?

I do not like them, Sam-I-am.  I do not like green eggs and ham.

Compressed with LZSS this becomes:

|That Sam|-I-am![]I| do not |like t[]
|Do you[]g|reen egg|s and ha|m?

[]em,[]|.[][].

Ò|Ó represents a format byte. Ò[]Ó represents a two-byte position and 
length.

The program uses words from the Core and Core Extension word 
sets. It also uses READ-FILE and WRITE-FILE from the File Access 
word set. It presumes that R/O, R/W, W/O, BIN, OPEN-FILE, CREATE-FILE, 
and TO, will be used appropriately for file assignment.

The program also uses ÒnotÓ, which can be equivalent to either 0= 
or INVERT.

Standard Forth file access for character-by-character input or 
output is hardly acceptable. Òread-charÓ used here can be painfully 
defined with READ-FILE.

    : checked	ABORT" File Access Error. " ;		( ior -- ) 

    CREATE single-char-i/o-buffer    0 C,    ALIGN

    : read-char						( file -- char ) 
        single-char-i/o-buffer 1 ROT READ-FILE checked IF
            single-char-i/o-buffer C@
        ELSE
            -1
        THEN
    ;

A better definition would be to buffer input of many characters at 
a time.

Note: The definition in ThisForth is a macro.

    : read-char   please "stream get-char unstream " ; IMMEDIATE

In ThisForth, macro-defining definitions for array and carray 
improve performance 25 percent.

: array     CREATE CELLS ALLOT IMMEDIATE DOES> (.) please "CELLS ~ + " ;
: carray    CREATE CHARS ALLOT IMMEDIATE DOES> (.) please "CHARS ~ + " ;

Standard words are written without lower case letters. Non-
standard words contain one or more lower case letters or are single 
letter upper case words other than I or J.  The spelling of a word is 
consistent and no words are distinguished by a difference of case. It 
is immaterial whether letter-case in your system is significant or 
insignificant.

Definitions of LZSS-Data-Compression and reload have been 
commented out.  They were used during development.

P.S. I no longer go out for lasagna on Tuesday, but if you come on 
to my house, I know where to get some great Italian or Mexican food.

WIL BADEN is a professional  programmer, with an interest in Forth.

                                                                                                                               
